# Technical Details for `SlogTestSuite`

## Testing Suite

The core code for verifying `slog` handlers is in `verify/tests/SlogTestSuite`.
This type uses (and is composed with)
[`stretchr/testify/suite.Suite`](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/stretchr/testify/suite).
All the features of `testify/suite` are accessible to any `SlogTestSuite` or derivative.

The `verify/tests` directory contains, at this time (2024-01-15),
nothing but the code for `SlogTestSuite`.
Since there are a lot of tests they have been broken up into separate files
by category or functionality.

The main files are:

* `suite.go`  
  Declares `SlogTestSuite` and a few top-level methods.
* `documented.go`  
  Tests based on `slog` documentation.
  Comments for the tests include links to referenced statements therein.
* `slogtest.go`  
  Tests based on [`slogtest/slogtest`](https://pkg.go.dev/testing/slogtest),
  a test harness (presumably) developed along with `log/slog`.
  Comments for the tests reference the original `slogtest` tests
  as well as a few links to documentation.
* `checks.go`  
  Subtest methods that are called from multiple tests or are really long.
  Think of these as complex assertions.
* `complex.go`  
  Algorithmically generated test cases.
* `duplicate.go`  
  Duplicate testing, which isn't currently regarded as an error.
  The status of this issue is currently
  [under discussion](https://github.com/golang/go/issues/59365).
* `other.go`  
  Tests that don't seem to fit into any other category.
  These include log level functionality and log record time format.
* `slogtest.go`  
  Verification tests that mimic those defined in
  [`slogtest.go`](https://pkg.go.dev/testing/slogtest) and
  a test that actually executes the `slogtest` tests.
* `replace.go`
  * Tests of
    [`slog.HandlerOptions.ReplaceAttr`](https://pkg.go.dev/golang.org/x/exp/slog#HandlerOptions)
    functionality, which appears to be
    [optional](https://github.com/golang/example/tree/master/slog-handler-guide#implementing-handler-methods).
  * Tests of replace functions defined in the `replace` package.
* `utility.go`  
  `SlogTestSuite` utility methods used in multiple places in the test suite.

Supporting files:

* `README.md`  
  The file you are currently reading.
* `doc.go`  
  Source code documentation for the `verify/tests` package.
* `data.go`  
  A few data items that are used in multiple places in the test suite.
* `valuer.go`  
  A `struct` that implements the
  [`slog.LogValuer`](https://pkg.go.dev/log/slog@master#LogValuer)
  interface for testing.
* `warnings.go`  
  Warnings specific to the test suite.

## Warnings

The verification test suite is based on
[`stretchr/testify/suite.Suite`](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/stretchr/testify/suite).
Running that code without the `-useWarnings` flag will result in
error messages generated by the test suite.
These messages can be confusing and difficult to parse.

In order to provide a more consistent, easy to understand output
a secondary mechanism using "warnings" is used.
The [code that manages verification warnings](https://github.com/madkins23/go-slog/blob/main/infra/warnings.go)
is currently located in the `infra` package.

### Usage

The following is a basic format for adding a warning to a pre-existing test:

```go
	if !suite.HasWarning(warning.SomeWarning) {
		// Standard test assertions.
		// Failure here results in the usual test errors.
	} else if /* tests succeeds */ {
		// Warning is redundant, mark with AddUnused()
		suite.AddUnused(warning.SomeWarning, suite.Buffer.String())
	} else {
		// Warning not redundant, standard test assertions would fail,
		// Add the warning to the warning.Manager.
		suite.AddWarning(warning.SomeWarning, suite.Buffer.String(), "")
	}
```

More complex code will sometimes be required.

Notes:
* The `warning.Manager` is embedded in the `SlogTestSuite`,
  so `HasWarning`, `AddUnused`, and `AddWarning` are all directly accessible.
